---
title: "Using the wash gem to write your external plugins"
description: "Shows how the wash gem can be used to write external plugins"
author: enisinan
---

Wash ships with plugins that let you interact with your AWS, GCP, Docker, and Kubernetes resources. You can also write your own plugins via the [external plugin interface]({{ '/docs/external-plugins' | relative_url }}). An external plugin consists of a *plugin* script. Wash shells out to this script whenever it needs to invoke an entry’s supported action (like *list*), or if it needs to query something about the entry (like its metadata). In a more general sense, Wash shells out to the plugin script whenever it needs to invoke an entry’s supported *method*. All plugin script invocations adopt the following calling convention

```
<plugin_script> <method> <path> <state> <args...>
```

where

* `<method>` is the Wash method that’s being invoked. This includes Wash actions like `list` and `exec`, and also non-Wash actions like `schema` and `metadata`.

* `<path>` is the entry’s filesystem path rooted at Wash’s mountpoint. For example, `/my_plugin` would be the `my_plugin`'s plugin root. `/my_plugin/foo` would be the `foo` child of the `my_plugin` entry.

* `<state>` consists of the minimum amount of information required to reconstruct the entry inside the plugin. It can be _any_ string. For example, `'{"klass": "Root"}'` could be a JSON object representing the plugin root in a higher-level programming language like Python or Ruby.

* `<args...>` are `<method>`’s arguments. For example if `<method>` is `exec`, then the exec’ed command would be included in `<args...>`.

Now let `<entry> = <path> <state>`. Then the plugin script’s usage becomes

```
<plugin_script> <method> <entry> <args...>
```

From this usage, we see that `<path>` and `<state>` are two different representations of an entry. `<path>` is useful for simple plugins where reconstructing the entry is easy. `<state>` is useful for more complicated plugins where entries could be represented as classes.

If you're a Ruby developer, then the [wash gem](https://github.com/puppetlabs/wash-ruby/tree/0.1.2) makes external plugin development easy by letting you model your entries as classes. We'll show you what this looks like by walking you through some of the [puppetwash](https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppetwash/tree/dadfbc3bb7b4f8fe379086182c3006237028ffc8) plugin's implementation, specifically the [puppetwash.rb](https://github.com/puppetlabs/puppetwash/blob/dadfbc3bb7b4f8fe379086182c3006237028ffc8/puppetwash.rb) file.

To facilitate the following discussion, here's what the `puppetwash` plugin looks like

```
wash . ❯ stree puppet
puppet
└── [pe_instance]
    └── nodes_dir
        └── [node]
            ├── catalog
            ├── facts_dir
            │   └── [fact]
            └── reports_dir
                └── [report]
```

If you've used Puppet before, then much of the above output should look familiar (and you should definitely try out the plugin!) If not, then don't worry -- this blog post is written for a general audience so you should still be able to extract some useful information from it.

Each label that you see in `stree`'s output corresponds to a class. For example, the `puppet` label (plugin root) corresponds to the `Puppetwash` class. The `pe_instance` label (a PE instance) corresponds to the `PEInstance` class. Similarly, the `report` label (a node's report) corresponds to the `Report` class.

Let's take a look at each class's implementations. Note that we're omitting some code for brevity.

{% highlight ruby %}
class Puppetwash < Wash::Entry
  label 'puppet'
  is_singleton
  parent_of 'PEInstance'

  def init(_wash_config)
  end

  def list
    config.keys.map do |name|
       PEInstance.new(name)
    end
  end
end

class PEInstance < Wash::Entry
  label 'pe_instance'
  parent_of 'NodesDir'

  def initialize(name)
    @name = name
  end

  def list
    [NodesDir.new('nodes', name)]
  end
end

...

# Report relies on end_time and hash. The others are included as useful metadata.
METADATA_FIELDS = {
  'end_time': 'string',
  'environment': 'string',
  'status': 'string',
  'noop': 'boolean',
  'puppet_version': 'string',
  'producer': 'string',
  'hash': 'string'
}

class Report < Wash::Entry
  label 'report'
  attributes :meta, :mtime
  meta_attribute_schema(
      type: 'object',
      properties: METADATA_FIELDS.map { |k, v| [k, { type: v }] }.to_h
  )
  state :node_name, :pe_name, :hash

  def initialize(report, node_name, pe_name)
    @name = report['end_time']
    @node_name = node_name
    @pe_name = pe_name
    @hash = report['hash']
    @meta = report
    @mtime = Time.parse(report['end_time'])
  end

  def read
    response = client(@pe_name).request(
      'reports',
      [:and, [:'=', :certname, @node_name], [:'=', :hash, @hash]]
    )
    make_readable(response.data)
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Notice that

* Each class extends the `Wash::Entry` class.
* Entry schemas are declared via class-level helpers like `label`, `is_singleton`, and `parent_of`.
* Each Wash method corresponds to an instance method in the class. For example, a report's `read` action is implemented by `Report#read`. Similarly, a PE instance's `list` action is implemented by `PEInstance#list`.
* Entry attributes are declared via the `attributes` helper and can be set/accessed as instance-level fields. For example, a report's `mtime` and `meta` attributes are set in the constructor (`initialize` method).
* The `state` helper lets you specify instance-level fields that should be serialized as part of the `state` key in the entry's JSON (this is also what's passed into the `<state>` argument in plugin script invocations). The `wash gem` will set these fields after it reconstructs your entry. Thus, you can safely access those fields' values when implementing the entry's methods. For example, the `@pe_name` field in `Report` is initialized in the constructor and then referenced in `Report#read`.

The `Wash::Entry` class makes all of this possible. It also comes with even more helpers that let you do other things like specify cache TTLs (see `Wash::Entry#cache_ttls`) or any prefetched methods (see `Wash::Entry#prefetch`).

Recall that plugin script invocations adopt the following calling convention

```
<plugin_script> <method> <entry> <args...>
```

where `<entry> = <path> <state>`.

All plugin script invocations are handled by the `Wash.run` function. Here's how `Wash.run` is used in `puppetwash.rb`

```
Wash.run(Puppetwash, ARGV)
```

And here's `Wash.run`'s [implementation](https://github.com/puppetlabs/wash-ruby/blob/0.1.2/lib/wash.rb#L46-L91). At a high-level, `Wash.run`

* Sets the `SIGINT` and `SIGTERM` handlers to ensure proper cleanup on `Ctrl+C` or on a `SIGTERM` signal sent by Wash
* Invokes the specified method
  * If the method is `init`, then `Wash.run`
    * Creates the plugin root object using the provided class (`Puppetwash`)
    * Invokes its `init` method (`Puppetwash#init`). Note that this is different from Ruby's `initialize` method, which defines the class constructor.
    * Prints the root object's JSON to stdout
  * Otherwise, `Wash.run`
    * Reconstructs the entry object from the provided `state` argument
    * Delegates to `Method.invoke`, which effectivelly calls `<entry>.<method>(<args>)`

Thus, we see that the `wash gem` frees you from having to do all of this plumbing yourself. All you have to do is define a few Ruby classes, implement some methods, then pass everything over to `Wash.run` to handle the rest. Try it out and let us know what you think!
